it felt like an oasis of sanity in a
crazy world
and so it's not that unusual that there
would be a guidance counselor there that
would know about
lsd research thanks a lot for coming
rick so we're live
um just so let me just introduce you
again so this is
a rick doblin he's the founder and
executive director of maps which is the
multidisciplinary association for
psychedelic studies
i know that uh a lot of our community
has been very interested in psychedelics
recently there's been a lot
of uh studies that have come out showing
the potential benefits
of using psychedelics um as mental
health treatments and i know
other will kind of get into how it has
additional uses
um and so i i think a lot of that
frankly is due to you rick because maps
has been funding studies and
you've been a long-term proponent for
decades
since 1986 is when i started maps but
but really since 1972
when i was 18 when i decided to focus on
psychedelics
yeah so thank you so much for all of
your hard work and dedication because i
i do think that psychedelics are going
to offer a really wonderful opportunity
in psychiatry um just a quick disclaimer
that you know psychedelics are currently
not
really medically approved treatments for
anything so um
you know we don't really re or i don't
recommend that you guys use them
we'll talk a little bit more about that
um so
you know in the studies as i understand
them are done in relatively controlled
environments
with controlled dosing and sort of a
certain amount of
purity of like what people are using so
a lot of times things are contaminated
and so you know steer clear of that but
rick i i know you may disagree
well um i i think our clinical studies
are done in a highly controlled
environment with
pre-screened patients with
medical tests to make sure that they're
fine
to handle the experience and then it's a
two-person therapy team
with them for eight hours and there's
been preparation and
integration so yeah it's a highly
controlled environment
um but i i do think that um
some of the most important experiences
i've had um
after i was quite familiar with
psychedelics was doing them on my own in
the woods in nature
um some once actually on my own in a
flotation tank
for 17 hours oh wow
with a big dose of lsd
so i i do think that it's wise to have
somebody
that's not under the influence of
psychedelics kind of like a designated
driver
because you can go deeper when you feel
really safe and you're not worried about
the interaction with the outside world
somebody at the door the phone or
anything like that
um and also i i do think that
there is a lot to be uh gained from
other contexts than therapeutic context
but but the concern i have there is just
that
when people take them in more of a what
you would say recreational or
celebratory context
if you're just doing it to have fun one
of the big dangers is that when
difficult stuff comes up
and psychedelics do kind of impact this
membrane between the unconscious and the
unconscious mind and
things that are emotionally charged come
to the surface if you're just trying to
have fun
and something difficult comes up if you
try to stuff it down
and not focus on it you could end up
worse off for months or years later
so i think the attitude going into it
is very important regardless of whether
it's a therapeutic setting or
any kind of settings back in the 80s
when mdma was first being
well it was middle 70s actually that
mdma under the code name adam was first
being used
in therapy settings and then eventually
escaped
out of those therapeutic settings and
was used uh recreationally under the
name ecstasy
there was still sasha shulgin who was
the chemist that
really helped pioneer this whole area
and sort of rediscovered
mdma he and his wife anne had a several
page mimeographed information sheet that
they handed out along with the drug and
and
it ended up with remember there is no
such thing as a casual experiment
experiment you do have to take it
seriously
even though it may not be in a
therapeutic or
religious uh spiritual setting it's
still you shouldn't underestimate these
substances and just don't approach it
casually yeah
so rick just in that vein i've actually
had a lot of people reach out saying
that they've had
ptsd or anxiety develop after
using lsd or other psychedelics what do
you think about that
um i think that that's um very
it's not uncommon i mean again it's when
you take these situa
lsd and psilocybin and
the classic psychedelics operate by
dissolving your sense of self
you know which can lead to this sense of
deeper unity and connection but it also
helps um if people are are not feeling
safe in a way it can contribute to
people
feeling like they're losing their mind
or that often we are so identified with
our ego with our sense of who we
are that the ego dissolution is
sometimes confused with physical death
that ego death or ego dissolution is
often
confused with physical death um stan
groff
who's um sort of the world's leading lsd
researcher and therapist
um he started doing lsd research in the
50s in the czech republic he's 89 now
and we just published his book way of
the psychonaut for
encyclopedia in her journey so i highly
recommend that for people but he told a
story about how
he watched a bunch of people um
doing lsd before he ever did it himself
you know now these are patients and he
was the the psychiatrist in this part of
his training
and he saw how this confusion between
ego dissolution and ego death and
physical death
often manifests um and so when he had
his first lsd
experience and he started going through
that same thing he
uh for a temporarily he persuaded
himself that somehow or other because he
had had a
a special illness when he was like six
years old that that had altered his
body chemistry such that even though
he knew that other people when they
started feeling that they were dying it
was actually not true
for him he thought it was really true
because he had this
illness when he was six and it only took
him it took him a while to work through
that but
this just relates to your question that
people can uh
when difficult stuff comes up and you
try to um
push it down or you don't feel safe in
the context to explore it
you have now created a situation where
these memories that have been
unconscious are now sort of
halfway conscious halfway not and
you can have very difficult experiences
in therapeutic settings in the future
and also underground settings and i've
done this
um you know back before mdma was illegal
but you know when people have difficult
experiences with lsd or psilocybin
what you can do is give half a dose of
mdma
and what that does it's not like a
tranquilizer that sort of
tries to take you out of it and freezes
the conflict in place
but what it does is it reduces the fear
of whatever it is that you're concerned
about the fear of dying the fear of
going crazy
or traumatic memories that are coming up
and then you can process it
so that you know that would be the if
people go to the emergency rooms or
something because they've got a panic
attack from lsd the ideal solution and i
know emergency rooms aren't
prepared for this at least not yet would
be to give a half dose of mdma
and then keep them processing it and
provide that sort of support
interesting so rick you mentioned that
you've been doing
kind of you've been interested in
psychedelics for a long time can you
just
tell us a little bit about like what
your upbringing was like and
yeah um yeah i'd be very glad um
yeah so it was really um i was born in
and i was born in in chicago um
you know i feel like the sort of
classic american story in that
grandparents on one side great
grandparents on the other side were
immigrants
they came fleeing anti-semitism and
violence against jews in russia and
poland to the united states
and then after a couple generations they
were successful
um my great grandfather was the classic
rags to riches in the sense that he was
actually a rag salesman
collected rags and um there was a family
story about one time in the winter in
chicago he's on his horse collecting
rags and there was a little
cart behind him and he froze to the
saddle
and my great-grandmother had come out
with hot water and
pour it there so that he could unfreeze
from the saddle
um and eventually build a paper company
um
so i was um
and then after in his 60s he sold the
paper company my great grandfather moved
to palestine
and built a house there in 1924 that is
now a historical site
on rothschild boulevard and it's kind of
an iconic image of
israel and tel aviv because the house
has been preserved but
in the backyard is a skyscraper and
right across the street is another
skyscraper so it's in the middle of this
you know very commercial district but it
was
when the house was built just um less
than a hundred years ago
it was just sand around it it was yeah
um so
the the all that is to say is that i've
been raised on stories of the holocaust
and you know the foundation of the state
of israel the
sort of the response to the the
holocaust
and my father was a doctor um so i you
know my family was well off
and so i just was given i'd say the
the gift of security in order to
look at more deeper risks
what do i mean by that what i mean is
that um
you know prejudice genocide um
you know those those you could you could
be financially secure as a lot of people
were in germany
you know before hitler and then you
still end up dying
um you know so that the deeper threat is
this kind of
um
problem of the human spirit you could
say humanity as a whole
is um a lot of people are um willing to
dehumanize others to be racist
to um think of us as separate from
nature and trash nature
so rick this is a deeply interesting and
philosophical kind of take
i'm kind of curious what was your act
like i mean were you thinking this way
when you were like 12
i was yeah see my father's hero was saul
lewinsky
and so saul alinsky wrote the book rules
for radicals he's a community organizer
in chicago obama studied with saul
linsky you know his approaches um
so my my family was very um progressive
you could say so you grew up in chicago
yeah i grew up in chicago i grew up in a
place called
uh well first off in skokie
and sometimes people know of skokie
because
it's heavily jewish a lot of survivors
of the holocaust
and at one point in time about i guess
it was even 30 or 40 years ago
the american nazis wanted to march
through skokie and the american civil
liberties union defended them
and um as a right of free expression and
and they lost a lot of support but i i
do think they did the whole
the right thing but in any case i grew
up surrounded by
jewish people i was um six years old and
my family tells this story i thought the
whole world was jewish
because that was the whole world that i
knew and my parents
when they realized that they said no no
no we're like a fraction of one percent
of the whole world
and i got really scared and i'm like
well you know what if they're right you
know what if
you know christ is the messiah we're
going to hell you know
and they were just like well just you
know we don't know about that but we're
a tiny tiny minority
and so this idea of um
sort of yeah security
um and the concerns of the world
that i was really moved in this
direction and so
when i was um growing up before i became
um
12 was the cuban missile crisis and so
that was something else that was deeply
deeply traumatizing you're a little kid
in school you know today
sometimes the little kids in school have
active shooter drills
which is terrifying but this other idea
that
there could be a nuclear war between the
the russia
and the united states and we have all
these weapons and it could
blow up the whole world then you know
and then you're saying what
how was that traumatizing in what way
well you just think of how insane that
is
you know that um we could be destroying
the world you know for these um
political conflicts and also that you're
told you know duck and cover
you know get under your
i'm sorry um you know duck under your
desk
and then you you might survive
you know and then you see all these
movies of hiroshima and nagasaki and
what's going on there what happened
there so it just was terrifying that
that
this was beyond like um genocide
of the concentration camps now this was
like we could lose the whole world and
that this could be pois
i remember reading i love to read
you know there was a book i read called
on the beach which people probably don't
know
much about today but it was about um
people that were on the beach in
australia
and this was after a nuclear war and
they were waiting for the radioactive
fallout to you know come to them in the
wind
so it was like post-apocalypse you know
post-nuclear war waiting for them all to
die
so it just expanded my sense that
psychological factors um the way that we
can dehumanize others the way that we
can make other people the enemies the
way we lose our
sense of common humanity that that that
was a real
critical problem and and i i recall
einstein saying that our technology has
exceeded our humanity
so rick yeah yeah i'm i'm noticing so
sometimes i'll ask you about kind of
your experience of growing up
and i i for example i asked you know
what was traumatizing about that
i noticed that a lot of your answers
have to do with the world
yeah that like you know the world was a
scary place that gender that we had
exceeded so i i'm
i'm kind of curious about you know use
your mind seems to have a focus
on the outside
that you're sort of thinking about these
like broad existential
or cultural or societal or worldly
problems about like
the nature of humanity losing our
humanity that our humanity has been
exceeded by our technology so i'm kind
of so i'm i'm sort of
i'm just kind of noticing that we don't
seem to be talking about like when i ask
you about you
you talk about the world ah well
my my parents were married for 67 years
before my father died
um i had a big extended family of
grandparents aunts and uncles and
cousins
so my personal life was
really secure and beautiful you know i
had loving parents loving grandparents
big extended family um
i'll share something else about me
personally um when i was 12
we moved from chicago from skokie to
winnetka
which is a little bit further north
suburb and my parents
had a house that was they they had a
house designed by a student of frank
lloyd wright's
and so i grew up in this incredibly
beautiful
structure that had an enormous impact on
me personally and how i thought
you know frank lloyd wright sort of
blends inside and outside
the whole idea that the you know the
inside flows to the nature outside um
it was a chinese pagoda with a big eight
foot by eight foot square skylight at
the top it was a one-story house but the
roof went up 22 feet so i had
it wasn't a box i didn't grow up living
in a box i grew up
with an indoor atrium where we had a
tree that was like
15 20 feet high inside the house and i
could see from my bed
through the skylight uh the moon and the
snow
and the rain at night and i could see
the whole house had stained glass
windows
uh not saying sliding glass doors i mean
sorry it did have some stained glass
windows too but it had sliding glass
doors
uh between as the exterior walls
and we had a very private location so
you know it just flowed from the inside
and out and
one of the biggest influences on me as i
was growing up was um
you know this house the the other part
was that i feel now
in retrospect that i had absolutely
everything that could be done
to give me a sense of self-efficacy you
could say that i could impact the world
so
i was born at the time of america height
of american power
you know before we got uh into vietnam
and stuff
um i was uh jewish the chosen people
before i realized that everybody's the
chosen people
um i was white um
male i was the first born male child
and you know my family was well off so i
i had
um you know probably every advantage
that you could
have so i guess when i started talking
about the world
that's where my um my insecurities were
not about my own life
but were about what the world could
impinge
on me in different ways and you know
when you're young jewish too you're also
taught about uh jewish history
and there's just this uh constant theme
of
various people trying to scapegoat and
kill the jewish people
and you know we were jerusalem world is
a dangerous place
yeah that that was the kind of thing but
i had that message from the utmo
sense of security in america after world
war ii with
you know just where we moved in winnetka
i i didn't know this at the time but
um they weren't um
a lot of people were unwilling to sell
the jewish people so there was four
houses
on a cul-de-sac that my parents got
together with three of their jewish
friends and they had a christian person
buy the land and then once the christian
person bought the land then they
separated out into these four jewish
families
wow so the only way we got to live in
winnetka was to overcome these
prejudices against jews interesting so
that was a
big part of my upbringing um
and so i guess the other thing is that i
really got to
be very interested in the other you know
that
and so i studied russian in high school
to learn about the russians and because
i had
my great grandparents came over from
russia and my parents were very much
open to educating me experiential
learning
so after my junior year of high school
my parents sent me to russia for the
summer
and to study russian and we went to
summer con tashkent there's about 60
other
high school students from around america
we went to london to paris
all over moscow but my parents
sent me on a mission as well and they
gave me in my
luggage they gave me a bunch of prayer
books to give to the people at the
synagogue because prayer books were
forbidden
at this time in soviet russia which was
you know atheist
so as a 16 year old boy my parents are
saying here's this political mission i
want you to do bring these prayer books
to the guys at the synagogue
wow and because i spoke um
russia not very well but well enough to
get by
on this group of 60 people
60 high school students uh me and two
other guys
were approached by some of uh russian um
young people as well but they were like
black market people
and so this is now 1970 summer of 1970
the psychedelic revolution is happening
in america didn't happen in russia so
the russians wanted to buy anything that
smacked of freedom
so button shirts even or um books or
albums somebody had uh abbey road
and you know they bought the record for
like two bucks we sold it
for a hundred rubles which was more than
a hundred dollars worth now rubles at
the time were not worth
anything outside of russia so they
didn't want anybody to be able to escape
with money
uh but we made thousands and thousands
of rubles by selling
stuff from all of the people in our trip
you know their clothes they're this and
that and we took our cut of course
and so in the end you know i just had a
large amount of russian rubles
and i went to the synagogue
in moscow to um give these prayer books
that my parents had sent me to deliver
and i said to this guy hey i got all
this money for you got these prayer
books and the guy said
hey we're being watched uh don't give me
anything here but i'll meet you at the
subway station
underground subway at a certain time at
a certain station and bring the money in
the books then
and i was like okay and i just thought
okay you know i'm a 16 year old kid if
the russians catch me they'll just send
me home you know can we just pause for a
second rick
can you tell me what on earth it's like
to be given a
covert political vision at the age of 16
like what's going through your head when
your parents are like what was your
understanding of what you were getting
yourself into
well my parents were like uh each of us
as individuals can make a difference it
was very empowering
it was like look we we can't stop the
prejudice against the jews we can't
overturn everything in russia but you
yourself can bring a few prayer books
and that is something to do so it
connected me with my small life
and what an individual can do maybe you
can't solve the whole uh
problem but but you can make a small
contribution so
that's what i felt like i i thought this
is a really wonderful thing that my
parents are thinking
that in this small way with a few people
now maybe getting a prayer book
i can make a difference and i think that
was that was the main education that i
got from them
is that you can't just stand idly by you
have to
get involved and even if it's you know
way bigger than any of us
each of us individually can make a bit
of a difference wow
so yeah i i respected them for it and um
and and also they were telling me that
um they wanted me to take certain risk
not only that that they didn't want me
to find the safe path
um that they wanted me to take certain
risks so
when i was 18 two years later and after
i had been in college
hold on we got to find out what happened
with the did you meet the dude in the
underground station
i did i did so what happened
well you know we made the transfer and i
got away safe
and nobody and he got away safely and i
gave him all these rubles and he was
super happy
and um and i just felt like wow
you know my first underground activities
was against the russians
against the communists in russia um
and it kind of prepared me for uh
addressing the drug war too
which was also similar you know unjust
in different ways that means i prepared
you for the drug war
well you know this was illegal what i
was doing in russia
and so you know once i started wising up
to the fact that the drug war was
uh criminalizing tools that could be
used for
personal growth for spirituality that um
and if i wanted to use them i would
become a criminal myself
that that was uh how i was prepared you
know that that this
first sort of law breaking was against
the communists
and then this law breaking was against
repressive drug war
interesting okay so you were saying uh
18.
yeah so at 18 now i'll also add that as
i was growing up my parents
um don't drink alcohol they don't
they're both dead now but they they
didn't smoke cigarettes they they
they were very um rational my
grandparents
my father's parents had a bookstore they
were you know poor immigrants had a
bookstore they lived above the bookstore
that
they had only one child but my dad and
mother were very
um rational and i and i think that
part of that was about the fear of what
happened in nazi germany that the
irrational
gets out of control and and we see
echoes of that in the united states
right now where rationality and truth
you know don't matter and it's to a lot
of people
so it was just this um they were very
rational and so we i didn't have a
history i'm the oldest of four kids too
so there was no drug use going on in my
house really my dad
who was a doctor realized also that a
lot of what he learned
in medical school was no longer true so
we had a
drawer of drugs medicines
at our house and whenever we get sick my
dad's attitude was don't take a thing
you know you're gonna heal on your own
it's going to be a little
few difficult days the downside of that
is when i say oh i don't want to go to
school i feel bad you know he's like no
you better go to school
so but i just believed the propaganda
that i was receiving about psychedelics
so even though i knew better in other
ways i believed
that if you took lsd five or six times
you were certifiably insane
okay that was one of the stories that
your sanity is a delicate
balance and if you take lsd five or six
times you've
permanently altered that balance you're
certifiably insane
i believed the idea that you had
chromosome damage
and that you would have deformed
children from psychedelics that was
another big thing you know i believe
that
that these drugs were something that
caused hallucinations delusions there
was nothing
valid about them whatsoever
and it was in my russian class actually
in my senior year when i was 17
that this uh sort of propaganda i
started cracking through the propaganda
a friend of mine in the russian class
gave me a book to read
and i just loved it this was a
phenomenal book
and when i gave it back to my friend he
said
do you realize that some of this book
was written
by the author when he was under the
influence of lsd
and and i was like that's impossible you
know there's nothing good comes from lsd
how could you possibly write this great
piece of literature
it can't be done and and he encouraged
me to check into it further which i did
and it turned out he was right
it was one one flew over the cuckoo's
nest by ken keezy
and some of it indeed had been written
under the influence of lsd
so that that sort of made me think
here's all this propaganda that i've got
it can't
can't all be true the other part was
that um
because i had thought so much about the
holocaust about the um
you know the human missile crisis and
all that now i was being confronted as i
was getting closer to
18 about vietnam and i was in one of the
last years of the lottery and i was
you know we had to face the fact what am
i going to do about vietnam
and at the time
and still if if you want to be what's
called a conscientious objector
and you can get a deferment for a
conscientious objector
you have to be a pacifist you have to be
against all war
and i was not against all war i think
that there are times when it makes sense
to defend oneself
so i couldn't be a conscientious
objector and this was also at the time
uh you know martin luther king was
assassinated um
a little bit before that and there was
just so much that was going on about
vietnam
um when i was actually
um 14
i was the precinct captain in my area
for eugene mccarthy the peace candidate
in 1968
and of course he got hardly any votes
and so i wanted to be closer to the
action so i actually volunteered
for mayor daley who was the mayor of
chicago and i was a runner
for the delegates inside the convention
of 1968
and so i was um
traumatized there at one point where i
was downstairs
in the sort of um outside of the the
where the main convention was taking
place and there was a media room and i
went in there and there was all these
tvs and people were watching tvs and it
was tvs of the riots in downtown chicago
the police riots against the
demonstrators
and just this way in which uh the
delegates were trying to pretend as if
life was normal while there was these
massive riots going on outside
it just really further radicalized me so
i decided to
um that what i would do in terms of
vietnam
is that i would not register for the
draft
that i would not cooperate with the
system
at all and that i would
drain the system of the most energy um
by having them come after me and i would
go to jail
so i talked this over with my parents
and they were
fine they just said the problem is that
if you do that you're going to be a
felon and you're never going to be able
to be a doctor or lawyer or whatever is
going to require a license
but they were not sympathetic with the
war in vietnam and
and so i you know what uh martin luther
king had said
that um he said for those who
think a law is unjust and are willing to
break the law
and suffer the consequences as
a way to send a message to everybody
else about the unjust nature of the law
that they actually have the highest
respect for the law
so that this kind of civil disobedience
it's it's you're you're really trying to
make the
system of laws better by showing the
injustice
yeah so i i thought that since i was
paying taxes i had a social security
number i was in
high school you know that i would be
caught
but as it turned out it was just this
amazing loophole
that i didn't register for the draft and
around
60 000 other people never registered for
the draft and nothing
happened to us at all enough people were
volunteering for the war
that um they had enough recruits
and somehow or other from
anticipating going to jail to then
realizing nothing's going to happen
so at a very early stage when i was 18
thinking that i was going to be caught
any day but i was in college and i
started doing lsd
and psilocybin and uh mescaline and
i started getting this intimations of
um this deeper unity you know beyond
ego identification i had a difficult
time with my drug trips because i was
um insecure and
you know not very emotionally adept and
so it was very hard to let go
it was very i got scared a lot but i
felt that this was very important it was
also
um 1971 1972. so the the backlash
against the 60s
really took place in 1970 with the
controlled substances act and nixon
criminalizing all these drugs saying
timothy leary was the most dangerous man
in america
um and so it was after the backlash that
that i started
uh doing these psychedelics and i
started sensing something which was
this why did you start well
because of that book because of um one
flew over the cuckoo's nest
you know i just thought this is
brilliant
and if if lsd had something to do with
this
then it's something that i should
explore
you know that it it's not just a
hallucination it's also that i was very
interested in psychological
factors and this repression how people
can be irrational
i had i had a great class in high school
on young
it was um so my senior year of high
school i had a jungian psychology class
and the only thing we did for the entire
semester was read moby dick
from a jungian perspective and so again
i started getting more and more
interested in psychology
and that's around the time i started um
looking to psychedelics
and it was really a political
understanding
that inspired me the most that if you
can
identify as part of everything
um you know and that that's your core
identity and that your other identities
of your race or your
gender your nationality or your religion
those are
secondary built on top of this common
humanity which is also linked intimately
connected with nature
that that's the antidote to genocide or
the antidote to this irrational
dehumanizing and otherizing others so
and when i looked at what happened with
the 60s and with all the psychedelics
and how that motivated a lot of people
to get involved with the anti-war
movement
and also with the environmental movement
the women's rights movement civil rights
movement
that it just felt like in a crazy world
where
it could we could blow up the whole
world with nuclear weapons or there
could be another hitler or that their
my own country was now doing these
things that
really seemed um counterproductive and
deadly and dangerous
and and not helpful um it's
it's just felt like here was a ray of
hope psychedelics and the psychedelic
consciousness
can not only do this connection to
spirituality but can also be used
to help help us with our own individual
issues and the fact that they were
criminalized
and wiped out the research wiped out all
over the world
and because i at the time i still
thought i was going to go to jail any
day and i couldn't have a normal career
i thought ha
it all comes together i can potentially
be a psychedelic therapist i could be an
underground psychedelic therapist
i don't need a license for that and i
need psychedelic therapy myself
and and i'll just say one other thing
what crystallized it for me was that
um i i had a lot of difficult times with
my trips
um and so i went to the guidance
counselor at college
what did i mean by difficult yeah yeah
um well to give you one of the worst
examples um resistance i was scared
to so you know psychedelics are moving
in you they're
opening you up your your logical train
of thought is
uh inhibited and and you're getting
feelings and emotions and different kind
of
visual images when your eyes are closed
sometimes when your eyes are open
and the sense of uh being safe enough to
surrender control and i didn't feel safe
enough to do that so
one time when i was um yeah at the time
also to
put this in context the standard dose of
lsd was 250 micrograms which was
a major existential dose right now a lot
of the
lsd tabs blotter tabs are like 60 or 80
micrograms
so this is three or four hits at one
time and that's
was just standard what people took you'd
be going through a period of a couple
hours where you have a hard time to talk
for those people that love music one of
my absolute favorite albums was
by david crosby came out during the 60s
with people from
all the other groups from san francisco
but the title of the album was
if i could only remember my name
so it's a classic psychedelic album it's
terrific if i could only remember my
name
by david crosby so that's what some of
these experiences
were like and so i i felt like i was
scared i couldn't let go
and i had the image of my brain
um heating up like a light bulb you know
there's like
a current that and if you resist the
current
you know it lights up and so i felt like
my resistance to all this mental energy
was such
that my brain was actually melting and i
had this
uh nasal drip at the time and i started
like
thinking oh my god that's my brain
coming out of my nose
wow and i would hear my brain sloshing
around and
and you know i exaggerated obviously
my brain did not melt but that was the
feeling of
you know one of the worst trips i ever
had that i was
and then what made it even harder is
that it was my fault
you know that i was bad that i was
resisting that it wasn't from the lsd
llc doesn't normally do that it was my
own weaknesses that was causing this
terrible situation to happen but i felt
that i needed to do it i felt like the
60s idealism had crashed and burned that
we needed to do this inner work to
figure out how do we make a better world
and so i i kept doing lsd and the
experiences kept
being more difficult still with
intimations of some beautiful moments
and that's where i went to the guidance
counselor at college at new college of
florida
in sarasota florida and i said help me
with my trip and
you know it was a different era then and
he took me seriously
and he said this is important what
you're doing and it's
just as important as your classwork uh
maybe even more important
that you really need to be seeing a
you know you're your own instrument you
are your own instrument and
you need to work on your own clarity as
well so that
you know we see the world through our
own blinders the whole scientific method
is about
getting past our own biases the beauty
of the scientific method is
uh methodologies to try to make it so
that we can see
more closely to what's really there
compared to what we want to see
so this guidance counselor gave me a
book to read
and this is what sort of sealed my
future rare guidance counselor
it was so lucky well beyond lucky
um the book was realms of the human
unconscious
observations from lsd research by stan
groff
this was 1972. this is stan's first
book it wasn't published till 1975.
so the guidance counselor had a
manuscript copy directly from stan
and reading that book is what
put it all together for me and i would
still recommend that book realms of the
human unconscious
to people who are looking to understand
more about lsd psychotherapy
but what stan was talking about was
sort of three basic areas you could say
you know your
psychodynamics based on stuff that
happened when you were
alive then this um birth trauma
this idea of you know going from this
floating in your mother's womb to going
through this traumatic situation of
birth that that kind of
imprints things in in consciousness and
then beyond that would be the union
era that he spoke about which was sort
of archetype spirituality mysticism
things that went beyond our own
individual life but sort of
about all humans and all that he learned
about
these realms from lsd and so it had that
mystical spiritual thing which i thought
was fundamental for political reasons
but
it also had a scientific overlay
because i had already learned to
distrust um
religious mythologies that
you know a lot of them are you know they
they make things too concrete
they can be beautiful symbolically but
when they become concrete then you have
to be
a little bit more suspicious of them and
then particularly when people say this
is the only one right way
and all that but so this was science
looking at um mysticism and spirituality
in a way i felt was trustworthy
but the ultimate thing was that it was
about psychotherapy
so it was about a reality check a
practical thing
what do all of these mystical what are
all of these
experiences that you can have what do
they actually do to help people
enjoy their lives more to have a deeper
richer sense of meaning and purpose
and that that was something because i
think you can get lost in spirituality
and lost in mysticism and and
where do you bring it back down to earth
and to try to practically
that's so practically so i thought this
was something reliable so i wrote a
letter
to stan groff now i'm just a confused
18 year old you know doing lsd and
stands in his
40s and is
you know premier md phd at johns hopkins
doing lsd research that was just
being shut down and he wrote me back
that was the amazing thing and he
encouraged me and he said he was doing a
workshop that summer
out in california with joan halifax who
he had just been married to
um and he invited me to attend
which i did so i hitchhiked across
america in
summer of 72 back when people were
hitchhiking
some people have heard about the rainbow
festival which is a big gathering
it's kind of a hippie native american
gathering and and i saw
signs about it the very first one as i
was hitchhiking across america and so i
ended up going to the first rainbow
festival
in granby colorado i ended up
you know making my way across the
country and i took this workshop with
stan
i did a month-long encounter group
in the mountains of california again
trying to work on myself as an
instrument i heard about primal therapy
which was sort of the primal scream
about this
birth trauma and so i did a three-week
primal intensive
and in the end of all of it i wasn't
where i wanted to be i i wasn't
evolved as much as i hoped i still had
all sorts of problems
um worries concerns and i i
i dropped out of college you know i told
my parents that
school no longer mattered to me that
this inner work mattered and i wanted to
study lsd
and i wanted to drop out of college and
i wanted them to pay for me to study lsd
and to give you a sense of how my
parents were
it took them a while but they eventually
decided yes they would help me
and my what my dad said was that he
thought i was a stubborn guy
and that um if he didn't help me
i would still try to do that and it
would take me a longer amount of time to
realize
it was a mistake and if he helped me
i would realize it was a mistake sooner
and he said
he had a shred of doubt maybe i needed i
knew what i needed to do
so he also validated that so my parents
were willing to
uh help me from age 18 drop out of
college and study lsd and so
after i did all these things i went home
and lived with uh my siblings who were
going to school but i just sat around
for a couple months and
that's where i realized that i had um
underestimated the importance of
integration
and i think to sort of weave this back
to some of your earlier
comments about people who said that they
had ptsd or
depression or so after their lsd or
psilocybin experiences
that you really need to spend time
integrating it that that's the way that
you can process these things that
it's not just about the experience at
all in fact that's a big
part of it but it's even more about what
you learn from it what you bring back
how you integrate it and i had had a
delusion
that the more drugs you take the faster
you take them
the more you'll evolve and i just really
didn't understand that
you could end up digging yourself deeper
into all that way you really need to
integrate what you've learned and that's
what we've
you know totally put into practice in
terms of our mdma assisted psychotherapy
lots of emphasis on preparation and
integration
the experiences are embedded in a larger
psychedelic
uh psychotherapy process
most of the sessions without drugs at
all so
i just really didn't understand that and
finally i realized that i was so lost in
my head about these
spirituality philosophical worldly
things
that i i felt like i needed to get
grounded and so that's where i got back
uh
i thought i need to build things get in
the physical world
which which basically led to 10 years
for me
of building houses building handball
courts of just building things
to help me integrate my psychedelic
experiences and it wasn't till i was 28
that i was able to go back to college as
a freshman to
formally study to be a psychedelic
therapist
wow interesting yeah so that's that's
very rare you know it's interesting rick
because i i think um
in a sense i think our story has i have
some interesting parallels with my life
to what
you describe and i think this is part of
the message that i think
our community needs to hear so you know
i finished college at the age of 23
after failing a bunch of classes
and then basically had my parents sort
of support me with the goal of becoming
a monk
um really yeah yeah and and
so i was lucky enough because you know i
i didn't have to worry about
how i was gonna pay for a ticket to
india and
and i would you know fly to india and
i'd stay at ashrams or monasteries and
and study different kinds of meditations
and
i think a little bit more on the
esoteric mystical or spiritual side
where i also had
experiences that were you know
far beyond mindfulness um
and then i sort of start i started med
school at the age of 27
and then it took me about four years to
sort of get into med school and i think
a big thing that
we hear a lot from from this community
is that like people feel like they're
behind
you know they're like 23 they're 24
maybe they dropped out of college
maybe they you know finished college and
weren't able to get a job and
and i've been trying to explain to them
and i think your story is
a wonderful example of of in my mind
karma
karma yeah that it's such an interesting
confluence of events you know it's like
it's so interesting how your
your your life what i'm hearing is like
a lot of threads that kind of get woven
together you went to some you grew up in
in outside of chicago went to a school
in florida it sounds like yeah right so
like like you wind up at a school
and you wind up with a guidance
counselor i for the life of me cannot
imagine a single guidance counselor i
have ever met or ever heard of
when someone when an 18 year old comes
into your office and says hey i'm having
like bad trips
they send you straight to like
university health services
for addictions no one says hey i have a
pre-manuscript copy
from stan groff who's sort of the
eminent researcher on lsd
and this is a book that's not going to
be published for years take it and read
it
like the the the statistical
unlikeliness of that confluence of
events
is just such an outlier
well i'll say one yes very much so but
the college that i chose was an
experimental college
that had started in the 60s and it had
been
created by people who really wanted to
do an alternative to
traditional education interesting and so
what they said was that the
students curiosity is the most important
thing
and therefore nothing should stand in
the way of the students curiosity
so they designed a school where
there was no grades it was all written
evaluations
heavy emphasis on independent study
with with professors you could create
your own classes you get a few of your
friends you say we want to study this
and
you come up with a reading list or so
you talk to a professor you can get
credit for that
you had to do a contract for a semester
and you passed or failed the whole
semester and you negotiate what's in the
contract
it can be some classes some independent
study some risk everybody had to do a
senior thesis
as well now the honors college of the
state of florida
but the other thing that they did not
that i did not know
when i um applied there um i
i just was getting tired of being boxed
in the
requirements this and that so the
freedom to explore my curiosity was
really attracted to me to that school um
they sent out stuff to people that did
well on the national merit scores and um
and so i just got something in the mail
from i've never heard about that but
the the two things that they did not put
in the brochure
that i didn't notice when i visited the
campus with my father
um until i got there was that they had a
tradition of all night dance parties
with psychedelics until the sun rise
the school the building was designed by
i am pay
the famous architect and it had a
courtyard palm court in the middle of
the dorms
that imp had designed where the
classrooms were off that he'd also
designed somewhere else
and so we would have these uh all night
parties with psychedelics
um and then in the morning um it would
go till sunrise
kind of like prefiguring raves and
things like that and um
but there was also this sense of the
individual doing their own psychedelic
experiences you know that that was
valued so
it was both therapeutic spiritual and uh
communal recreational celebratory
with psychedelics so that was that's how
dude
yeah well it gets even more so um the
swimming pool
um it didn't have a lot of facilities it
kind of was a
a school for the imagination because
john ringling the ringling brothers
circus
had was wintering in sarasota that was
their long
their history there and so the john
ringling's house
which is this massive beautiful big
party house now a state
of florida museum was um right next to
the campus and his brother's house
charles ringling's house that was
donated to the campus to create the
school so
we we had this like party theme carnival
theme circus theme
but also there was a woman who actually
had studied with jung marion hopping was
her name and she taught jungian
psychology
and her husband was um quite wealthy
and they donated this olympic size
swimming pool with a big deck around
it big fences all around it and somehow
or other it evolved into a nudist colony
so i was a super shy guy in high school
could barely talk to girls
and now here i am at in this nudist
colony with with all these
um you know naked men and women
and it just felt like the underground
energies of sex and drugs
were sort of brought to the surface
where we could
try to deal with them it felt like an
oasis of sanity in a crazy world
and so it's not that unusual that there
would be a guidance counselor there that
would know about
lsd research what i think is wild is
that you describe the nudist colony with
all night psychedelic parties
as the oasis of sanity in a crazy world
yeah well it just felt that way that so
much is repressed
that and when you repress stuff it comes
out warped and distorted
and when you bring that to the surface
you can work with it you can see
it's just um yeah it did feel like this
oasis of sanity that
that we and the campus police their
job was to protect us from the real
police
from the city police and so
just to give you an example again um
they had two lists of where people were
when when parents would call or people
would come and say you know where
where's
this uh where's my son or daughter you
know what room are they in
so they had the list at the police the
cop shop we called it they had the list
of wherever
the rooms were that people were assigned
to live in
but then they had another list of where
people were actually living
you know you could move in with your
girlfriend or you could do all these
different kind of things
on campus uh it was just astonishing so
it it
and and there was this general sense
that um
you know the young people are leading
the revolution we're doing this
psychedelic stuff and
um you know the older people are you
know repressing and so
it did feel like an oasis of sanity and
and so i just
would not be who i am without that
particular
college experience wow dude that's
that's
wild man thank you so much for sharing
that
yeah now i'd also i got a question for
you which is uh
how did you decide not to become a monk
so you you go to meditate you're doing
all these things
what made you turn away from from that
path
i so in a sense i didn't turn away so
what i real a couple of things one is i
met my wife and fell in love and was
conflicted for a while
um and and so it's funny because i sort
of talk about it like i met her at the
end i actually so as soon as i tried to
become a monk so when i was 21 years old
i went to my teachers after one summer
so
i had a pretty amazing summer where i i
started to practice some pretty
intensive meditation
and and what i loved about it is that i
i had some spiritual experiences
and so i was always sort of a curious
kid was always a skeptical kid but
when you have experiences of
you know con connectedness or
other i mean it's hard to describe but
you start to
experience sensations and
experiences that are different from your
day-to-day existence
so a good example of this is like
sometimes i'll ask people
where their thoughts are localized in
space
and i think if you really pay attention
you'll learn
that your thoughts are localized
actually somewhere around the space of
your head
but we don't think about our thoughts as
being around our head
until you haven't like something like an
out-of-body experience where your
existence is outside of your physical
being
and then once you step outside of your
physical being then you realize oh
there's actually like a layer on top so
i had these kinds of experiences which
were really fascinating and i loved them
but really a lot of my deciding to
become a monk so i went to my teachers
and i said hey i want to take my vows
and at the age of 21 i want to become a
monk
and they said we're we're thrilled that
you want to do this fantastic
go finish your education go get a
doctoral degree
and then if you're still interested at
the age of 30 we'll take you
and and so i think they sort of
recognized that i was passionate and
that it was sort of
a decision that was made from the wrong
places and what i realized is that my
decision to become a monk was actually
out of like ego
i'd failed at life i sucked at it i knew
i was smart
i was the son of two doctors and they
had everyone expected so much from me
and i expected a lot for myself
and so i found myself underperforming
compared to people who i was better than
and that was really hard for me and so
what i realized is that
i'm going to devalue everything that i'm
bad at
and i'm going to become spiritual as
opposed to materialistic
i'm not going to care about going and
becoming a doctor and i'm going to rise
above all of that
i'm going to be better and all that but
really it was like a very deep
rooted spiritual ego which i think is
very present
like in a lot of spirituality there's so
much underground ego
look at how spiritual i am and and it's
really bizarre
and so i realized that i don't need to
become a monk
that actually ultimately becoming a monk
is not about wearing a particular thing
or living in a particular
place it's all about the quality of your
internal experience
and that being a monk is about attitude
it's about paying attention to what's
within whether you're doing external
things or not it's completely irrelevant
and so you know i i think it was strange
for a while because i would do things
like sleep on the floor and stuff
because i didn't care
and then my my wife cares about nice
things so she would get nice things and
i would learn to appreciate those and
like
also learn that like it doesn't matter
whether you sleep in a nice bed
or on the floor and like you just like
being a monk is entirely internal it's
nothing on the outside
um and so ultimately that's why i
realized that it was
it was kind of false and then
i i was in love and i was conflicted and
then i realized actually that like
that was also a division that i didn't i
could i could love her and be with her
and that
that was part of my karma and i could
also continue my internal spiritual
journey
um which is what i've done so that's
kind of how i decided
wow now i i have a a monk story i'd like
to
share it seems very appropriate now so
this is uh
one of the experiences that where i took
mdma by myself
camping out in nature um this was now
in um um 1985.
and i had gotten to know a christian
monk brother david steinle ross
and i i would encourage people to uh
check him out
he's he's written one book was called
the gratitude is the heart of prayer
there's something from brother david
steinle ross on
youtube i think it's like a three-minute
meditation about gratitude like today
it's a beautiful beautiful thing but he
was also
ecumenical he was very much
even though he was roman catholic he was
very mystical he wasn't
didn't see that in in only those ways
and also i i met him
in 1982 um when i went
to uh when i first went back to college
at age 28 but i started
my first semester was at esslin
institute in big sur with stan
groff on a month-long workshop called
the mystical quest
he was one of the teachers that's where
i also learned about mdma
later on in 83 and 84 i had given him
mdma he expressed an interest in doing
mdma
in half doses in the monastery as a tool
to aid meditation
and he found that it was very helpful
and when we
sued the dea in 84 to try to keep mdma
legal as a medicine there started to be
some publicity
and in the beginning of 85 newsweek did
an
article uh the first major media article
on mdma and it quoted me but it also
quoted brother david and he said that
he described his experience doing mdma
as a tool for meditation and he said
that it
produced the same enlightened attitude
that uh hmong could spend 30 years
trying to meditate to achieve which is
an incredible statement
the quietness that you can get so i i
took mdma one time um
shortly after this article came out i
was camping out it was just this
beautiful
beautiful spot um right at the beaches
uh at the edge of the pacific the
mountains came down right behind me
um there was some boulders out in the
ocean so that um the high tide came
around me but i was protected from the
high tide
there was a freshwater stream right
nearby and
it was a safe protected spot that i knew
really well
and so i decided that i would take mdma
there and i was not in a relationship at
the time
and i was thinking i wonder why would
somebody want to be a monk
you know what what's the you know and
why would somebody want to be celibate
and and i also was wondering how do i do
what i want to do
and not get busted by the dea as well so
under the influence of mdma um you know
it's not visual like lsd or psilocybin
but
there was a big tree there and i was
sort of projecting images on the tree
and the tree was like the dea looking at
me
um and how do i stay safe and and i came
up with this strategy basically which
has
served me well i think which is that the
dea is always looking at what's under
the rock
you know what's hidden but a lot of
times you just come straight at them
even if you're criticizing them um
ironically that can be safe you know
you're just coming right at him
so then i started thinking about um
brother david
and why would somebody want to be
celebrate and why would somebody want to
be a monk and
i was thinking about that for a while
and then i just felt like the roaring of
the ocean the waves of the ocean
the ocean was so enormous and then the
sky
the milky way and the sky was just
incredible
and it just felt like i was perched on
the edge of the world which i really
was in a sense and i started thinking i
might just
disappear you know what is keeping me
here i mean
the the universe is so vast um
and and i felt like i was dissolving
into the universe and and there was that
that beautiful aspect of that but then
after a while
i realized i'm still here you know
what's keeping me here and
then i started thinking about gravity
that somehow or other
i had this image of gravity
i as the arms of a lover that that i was
cradled in the arms of gravity
and that that was keeping me together
that's what
made things adhere instead of just
dissipate into everything
and i i felt gravity as
warm as an embrace as an embrace of a
lover
and i thought aha this is what the monk
and celibacy is about that you're
supposed to
feel that kind of love for the universe
if you focus it on a
specific person maybe that makes it
harder to
to transfer it to the that same kind of
warmth to the
to the universe and so one once i felt
that
i after that experience i never have
felt as lonely as i have
before because i feel like there's this
love woven into the universe
but then once i realized that i was
cradled in the arms of gravity and that
this was kind of what the monastic life
was in part about i said great
now i don't have to be a monk yeah
now i can have a real lover as well as
the gravity as a lover
now 30 years after that i was at a
conference
and brother david was one of the
speakers and
he was uh sitting next to me at dinner i
purposely went to sit next to him at
dinner
and we kept in touch over the years but
i had never spoken to him about this
experience and and i said
uh brother david i just want to share
with you this experience the most
mystical experience really of my whole
life
and you were connected to it and i'm
wondering just what you might
think about it and so um i told him the
story and i told him about um
you know cradled in the arms of gravity
and he just was silent for a very short
time
and he said every day
i think about gravity every day
and he reaffirmed that sense that the
gravity and this kind of is a force of
love
so i i felt that it took 30 years for me
to kind of get that affirmation from him
that that was
the case and and so um i i feel
like um that that was one of the pivotal
experiences of my life
that on the beach yeah thank you so much
for sharing rick this has been
amazing i think um i know you have to
get going in about 15 minutes so
i'm kind of curious i think i've got a
couple of questions or directions
one is uh well one thing i just want to
reinforce this point so the first thing
is like for people who feel like they're
behind i think rick
you're a wonderful example of like you
know don't
compare yourself to someone else's
journey
and even this last story that you told
is like even
you know the the ending to this
particular experience
happens 30 years later yes exactly you
know
and and so what i'm what i'm really
hearing from you and what i want people
to really take away is like what i've
experienced in my life which is that
you're not living anyone else's life
you're living your own
so don't judge your life by what other
people are doing or things like that
because
it sounds like you started college at
the age of 28
and then built up this organization
where we're now you know i mean maps is
really an amazing organization yeah well
i i started college at 17 and then
dropped out at 18 for 10 years
and then went back as a college freshman
at age 28.
yeah it's crazy um so so i just wanted
to kind of
wanted to do it any differently i mean
it was really the right thing for me and
i i think the lesson you're trying to
pull out of it is really right yeah is
that you're on your own timetable
and you don't have to compare with you
know what's right for somebody else
might not be what's right for you
and um you know the the other
sort of aspect of this is um and and
i'm not quite sure where you were and
your wife are with children but
um you know my wife and i we've had
three children but they've all
uh two of them are on their own one of
them is still in college
um but when you have little kids you
end up um you know it just seems like
it's going to go on forever
looking forward you know it's like it's
never going to change you're always
going to
have your kids at home but when they're
gone and you look back
it's like a heartbeat where did those uh
18 20 years go
yeah so what i want to say from that is
that to have a 20-year plan or a 30-year
plan
is not really that long you know before
you know it the future will have arrived
so also chart your own way don't feel
that you're behind others but also you
can have a very long-term plan
uh and i think a lot of people don't do
that and and then you don't plant the
seeds
that can later blossom all these years
later
yeah so that's the mistake people make
is oh you know i've got to think in more
short-term chunks
rick you may not understand what i'm
about to say but i think it's
illustrative so
what i'm hearing from you is that you're
a late-game carry
yeah and and so i don't know exactly how
you mean that but
the yeah late bloomer is sort of how i
see myself yeah
yeah right so i i love the way that you
kind of think about it i think the
problem is that everyone wants to be
like early game focused and they don't
recognize that you can sow all these
seeds and these
you know nudist colony all night parties
are soda foundation
along with you know an incredible work
ethic and parents who
sort of acknowledge that you're probably
wrong but still held enough faith
and enough humility to kind of give you
a chance and then
also that i i sort of see the forces of
karma kind of supporting you it's not
quite as active as i'm making it sound
but well i would say so
i'll just share that i had a dream this
is what i think is my karma
the dream was many people have seen um
space odyssey the movie by stanley
kubrick and near the end of the movie
there's the scene where the astronaut is
in an all-white room he's on his
deathbed
this is right before the sort of birth
of the star child so in the dream
and this is in my middle 20s so this is
after i decided to focus my life on
psychedelics but
um i remember this dream like like it
was just last night
um so there's a person on a death bed
the room is all white and the the fella
tells me a story the story is that
he was miraculously
safe he almost was killed but he was
miraculously saved and he knew he was
saved for a purpose but he didn't know
what the purpose was
and then he says to me let me show you
how i almost died
and it turned out that the scene now all
of a sudden we're out of this all-white
room we're at the edge of town it's
somewhere
russia poland something like that
there's thousands of jews that are lined
up
in front of this big mass grave bunch of
germans they machine gun them all
they're pushed into this mass grave they
throw some dirt over it
and this guy is wounded but not killed
and then it sort of switched a little
bit into like a jesus story where he was
buried for three days and then he was
resurrected sort of so he sort of climbs
his
and i'm with him in the dirt underground
seeing this whole thing and then he kind
of comes to
and he claws his way up and um he gets
end up somehow earlier he knew where the
up was and
he gets onto the uh the dirt out of
that and there's nobody there it was at
the edge of town he runs into the woods
he works with the partisans
uh till the end of the war and then then
he said that's how i was almost safe so
now we're back in the all-white room
he's on his deathbed and he said now
i know what my purpose was i know why i
was
saved from that i know what my purpose
is and i'm like oh
what did you learn he said my purpose is
to tell you to study psychedelics
and that that's going to be the sense of
mystical connection
is going to be the antidote to genocide
and in my head i'm thinking
oh okay i've already decided that this
is a heavy thing
you're trying to lay on me you know that
that you want to pass this thing on so
you can die in peace
and in my mind i'm saying okay i already
did decide that so
um i will accept that i said okay you
can lay that on me i will do that
and and then he died um and then i walk
out of this white room
i watched him die i walk out of the
right room and all of a sudden i'm in
the middle of a forest
and then i i i go down there's a little
stream and so i'm sitting in front of
the stream i dread a lot of hermann
hesse and
this siddhartha and so i'm like watching
the stream go by
and and all of a sudden i realized
there's a young boy
sitting next to me and about 10 years
old or so
and then i realized i know this boy um
i i know his father and his father is a
friend of mine
and at the time i had a large stash of
lsd
that i was scared of getting busted so i
had asked his father if he would store
my lsd stash at his house in his freezer
and his father had said yes so once i
connected this little boy in the dream
to lsd
then it all made sense then i woke up so
i feel that the karma for me is this
all these people that died because they
were dehumanized because
people were motivated by fears and
anxieties that
one of the many strategies that can be
helpful for that is this kind of
helping people understand how we're all
connected and helping people work
through their own fears and anxiety so
that they're not so easily manipulated
by
by them yeah so uh rick that's a great
segue i think to an important question
is that
we get a lot of people in our community
who are wondering okay so they've heard
your amazing story
right and i think a lot of people um you
know feel
directionless feel a little bit broken
have insecurities and anxieties of their
own
and want to partake in what you're
describing
so and i struggle with this too it's
interesting i actually have a
a patient who has treatment refractory
depression
who i'm trying to figure out how can i
help this person because i do think that
it's not like a neurochemical imbalance
or something i i really do think that
their depression is more spiritual in
nature
so what do people do who are interested
in this kind of healing
because as a medical doctor you know i
certainly won't
and and really can't recommend it right
now
um and and so but what do people do like
so we do get questions about
you know i i want to like figure out
what my purpose is
i want to feel less insecure i want to
heal
on a spiritual level what should what
should they do
well first off you can recommend
ketamine to people ketamine isn't a
medicine for um refactory depression
sometimes it does help people have
spiritual experiences
i i think the first thing and we sort of
talked about this earlier
is that what's legal and what's moral
are two different things
so everybody has to decide for
themselves
to what extent are you going to respect
certain laws and to what extent
are you not going to so you know
that's for each person to decide for
themselves what risks are you willing to
take
um one of the incredible things about
stan that i think
stan groff that was so remarkable is
when psychedelics were criminalized
a lot of people who had been psycho
research said okay
it's taken out of our hands let's
explore meditation let's explore other
things
and then some of even like we don't need
psychedelics anymore you know there's
other ways to get there which is true
there are other ways to get there but
what stan did
was to see that that kind of
non-ordinary state of consciousness that
was produced by psychedelics was very
valuable
and he developed an approach called the
holotropic breath work which is
hyperventilation
with support in groups to let these
deeper experiences come out so anybody
legally anywhere can look for
holotropic breathwork practitioners and
there's quite a few hundreds that have
been trained around the country
and around the world even more that
practice holotropic breath work or other
kinds of therapies so people can go to
therapies
i think that there there's um it's a
very small place but it's called peyote
way church
of god and you can go on an individual
vision quest with peyote you know
they they're part of the native american
church they've got a legal context for
it
you know you know it's not that big but
they have it set up for people to take
they
and wander off you know in a special
place where they're
camping you can also look for ayahuasca
churches
cert in america there's quite a lot of
ayahuasca experiences that
that the two churches uned vegetable and
santo dami are legal
but um you know most of the ayahuasca
circles are not exactly in those kind of
settings but you could try those um but
i i also think that
there are um a lot that can be done with
close friends
you know a lot of peer support so
because you know at college we have this
all night dance parties what maps is
doing
on the one hand it's mostly uh drug
development
mdma assisted psychotherapy for ptsd
through the fda
but we also have what we call the zendo
project which is psychedelic harm
reduction for people
who have difficult trips that take it
outside of medical context how do we
help them
so we train all sorts of people in this
so people could look at the maps.org
website
and we have training materials about
zendo how do you help somebody with
difficult trips we also have what's
called the treatment manual
for our mdma assisted psychotherapy for
ptsd
so you go to the research menu bar mdma
near the bottom of it it's called um
treatment manual that explains how our
therapeutic approach is done and you can
practice it on your own with your
friends um
sitting for you or or you can sit for
your friends i i think that
um it's difficult you know to find
ways to channel that interest at a time
where we still are living under
prohibition um you know denver has made
the mushrooms the lowest enforcement
priority so now has
oakland so as ann arbor there's the
oregon psilocybin initiative that's
going to be on the ballot
so there are more opportunities for
people to go to certain
areas and have these experience you can
go to the netherlands amsterdam for
mushroom experiences there are
all sorts of people that bring groups
there there's going to south america for
ayahuasca
personally i i prefer things in my own
cultural context
um but you know some people really like
going into these other contexts i think
that what you can do is
study humanistic and transpersonal
psychology
uh transpersonal psychology is sort of
beyond the person trans it's what we
share in common and it does have a lot
to do with these kind of spiritual
mystical states but it also
has a lot to do with you know just
regular psychodynamics and what's the
root of a lot of the problems
and and i think that there are going to
be
over the next um couple of years we're
hoping now we anticipate
that if our research continues to go
well
sometime in early 2023 we should have
mdma assisted psychotherapy approved for
ptsd as a prescription drug
the people working with psilocybin are
are thinking
maybe the end of 2023 2024 they'll have
psilocybin approved
we'll be setting up all these
psychedelic clinics and the therapists
all want to be cross-trained they don't
want to be an mdma therapist or a
psilocybin
therapist or a ketamine therapist they
want to be a therapist that knows all
these different
modalities that we're really trying to
bring in a new
field of psychedelic psychotherapy where
the psychedelic psychotherapists have
the range of psychedelics available to
them and they customize the treatments
according to the individual
i think people who are struggling now
um it's difficult one way to
look at it is clinicaltrials.gov
if you go to clinicaltrials.gov
pharmaceutical companies sponsors have
to list their studies there and you can
put in drug and condition
and you can see what studies are
available that you could maybe volunteer
for there are even studies some of them
that need healthy volunteers where you
can
volunteer and get psilocybin or mdma you
know as part of the control groups or
something
interesting so i i think there's
opportunities for people but but
many of them if they are involving
psychedelics are going to be against the
law
and so that's really up to each
individual's moral compass
you know what what they feel about that
um but but also i would say to people
um don't give up hope you know that the
things are coming around
the things are changing and there will
be um increasing opportunities
and the other big thing i'll say is
dreams you know we tend to undervalue
dreams
dreams are incredible tools freud called
them the royal road to the unconscious
you know jung did all sorts of stuff
about his dreams um you know i just
described to you one of the most
important dreams in my whole life that
that's really influenced me my sense of
karma what i've been passed on
through my forebears in a sense so i i
think people
can spend a lot of time just focus on
your dreams and if you don't remember
them in the morning just
have a dream journal you write that down
and um
even if you write down i dreamt nothing
um you know over time you'll get
better and better you'll remember more
and that can be a powerful tool for you
to work on psychodynamic issues
yeah thank you so much for kind of
offering that perspective i think um
you know just one or two thoughts that i
kind of have one is that
i think holotropic breath work is pretty
interesting i think it has a lot of
roots
actually in kundalini brown i am yeah
yeah and so i actually sort of steer
clear of holotropic breath work because
i think sometimes it can have i think it
needs to be done with the right kind of
setting
um it can bring stuff to the surface the
same way that it's like delicate
experiences yep
yeah and and so when i was studying
kundalini yoga myself i mean it was done
in isolation
actually precisely for that reason so
like you're done it's done with a guru
and like
it's very intensive and and what my
teachers told me is that it's kind of
playing with fire and it can be
powerful and transformative and it can
also really
kind of mess you up if you until you
learn how to integrate it
i mean the interesting thing is in
either case the experience is powerful
it's really i
really like your emphasis on integration
afterward it's it's when you kind of
talk it through or work it through with
a
with a guru um that really i think you
can
really change uh one other thought that
that i i kind of just want to share is
that
you know i had some realization i don't
know if this is entirely true of
psychedelics but i think it's sort of
theoretically true that
if you think about chemical substances
they don't really
change our brain really what they do is
activate it
right so you look at any any compound
and and
what it serves as an activator like if
you think about marijuana they're
endogenous cannabinoids they're
endogenous opioids
um i don't know necessarily that what
they're what we would call endogenous
psychedelic compounds but
it's been my understanding and what my
teachers have told me is that
essentially
you know if you take if you use
something like mdma like this
this monk that you mentioned sort of
said that 30 years of dedication you can
achieve that in one moment with with
mdma and i think that that's true
i think that the the interesting thing
about
meditation is that you know you sort of
learn how to cultivate a particular
branch
of spiritual experience and my
experience
or my understanding has been that in
psychedelics you know different
compounds will lead to generally
speaking different kinds of experiences
but when you take a substance you don't
really know what you're signing up for
um exactly well stan groff has talked
about lsd
as a non-specific amplifier of the
unconscious
yeah which means that you don't know
what's going to come up and
your conscious mind can't predict it you
could even have a list of
all the things that you want to deal
with during this session and what
emerges may be completely different yeah
that's interesting
yeah so i know you've got to run well i
do have a bit more time if
so i i think you know another 10 15
minutes uh
i mean i i think rick though the richest
the best part of this i think has been
your stories bro
like i think i think hearing your
stories has been has been eye-opening
man
it's such an interesting background and
it's so interesting because i
you know i had envisioned you as as you
know this this phd who had
done research and and just to hear a
little bit about your life has been
amazing
um okay well i have two another story i
think that yeah
maybe so this comes up with maps of
strategy so this is where i really
um so this is a story of two days one
day where i did dmt the next day
ketamine and so again back in 1985
so this is you know 35 years ago but but
really maps his strategy evolved from
that from
in a sense from those experiences and
what i mean by our strategy is
on the one hand is drug development on
the other hand is drug policy reform and
trying to
work on what's called mass mental health
that
we want to help people that are
suffering first that's the doorway into
a frightened culture that's been
scared about psychedelics that has a lot
of misinformation
that that is um the opening uh wedge you
could say medicalizing
but that we all need this kind of
mission purpose uh meaning
um and healing and growth even if we
don't have a clinical diagnosis
so masses had this parallel strategy and
so
where that sort of came um
from was these two experiences um
also took place at esslin and this was
with the groups of people that were
gathering to try to figure out how to
protect the use of mdma
as a therapeutic drug so
one day we did dmt this was with terence
mckenna ralph metzner a bunch of other
people that were very um experienced i
had never done dmt and and so the way we
did it was
there was about eight of us sitting in a
room and one person would would smoke
the dmt
it takes around 10 minutes you just lie
back and you have this experience and
then you come back
and you share a little bit with the
other people about what happened so this
is the integration part
and then you pass the pipe to the next
person and then they do it and then each
person in sequence will have this
um dmt experience
and so for me the the dmt which i'd
never taken before
um it's very powerful now it's the main
active ingredient in ayahuasca
but when you take it in oral form it
comes on slower
it lasts longer when you smoke it it's
about a 10 minute experience and so
the the first thing that i experienced
was just uh
you smoke it you sort of fall back
i just felt there there's a line there
was just like a horizontal line
and then there was a vertical line and
then it turned red it was a color and
then it started assembling in
cubes so it became kind of um
three-dimensional
and and then it rapidly turned into like
an m.c escher kind of drawing where the
the dimensions didn't quite work and
then i was blasted into
sort of the universe and all of that is
like fraction of a second
but you know this was the progression of
it and so then i
i felt like i was part of creation part
of this uh big bang and
and and at one point i had this thought
which is amazing in a way that you can
still be thinking
um even though your normal orientation
is not there
that in the most inner parts of myself
um and and you talked about this about
where are your thoughts located you know
and you're saying it's around here but i
thought inside
my my head where i i talk to myself
where i think
i'm using words and i didn't invent
these words
you know in the most private part of me
it's
from millions of people that have
developed the english language that have
developed
language that all of this might so the
part that i think is the most private in
a way is not
actually the most private it's it's
intimately connected with everything
that's come before and so i felt like
more and more it's just this beautiful
thought of this whole long stream of
evolution i'm part of everything and
and it just just felt great but then i
had this thought
which you know i've learned not to
disregard these thoughts but the thought
i had was if you're part of everything
and everything's part of you then hitler
is part of you too
it's not hitler out there i'm all good
that bad is out there the
the the hitler is part of me too i have
to own that
and that was just such a shattering
thought
that um
it just really brought me down and i i
felt like there's a logic to it i
i can't deny it um this inner hitler
and so it just depressed me
you could say and and the whole rest of
the day you know we went through i told
my story we went through the rest of the
other people's stories uh
but the whole rest of the day i was just
really wrestling with this thought that
um that there's this touch point where
part of me is hitler too that i can't
really disown that
um it was very kind of a somber day so
the the next evening we decided that we
would do ketamine
and this was intramuscular a hundred
milligrams ketamine intramuscular this
lasts
differently it lasts about an hour so we
didn't we all did it more simultaneously
we
we didn't want to you know one person
sit there while they would go out for an
hour and come back
all right so during this experience of
ketamine
um somehow or other i was
into a different space i was um
above and behind hitler as he was giving
a
speech to a a mass rally
and i'm thinking okay hitler's part of
me i'm potter hitler how do i get inside
this part of my head or how do i get
inside his head to
see about healing this murderous um
nature of what he's doing how do i
you know do this and and so that got me
really scared like i have to psych this
guy out i have to figure out what's
going on
and um and the more that i saw him do
these uh speeches
this particular speech um and
and then i got this sense a whole
different sense i'd never thought of
about the heil hitler salute the way it
was heil hitler and then everybody would
do it back to him
um and it it felt like this power from
the one to the many
so that he was doing the salute and then
they would all do it back to him
so it's like push out this energy and
then they would all give their energy
back to him
and then he would do it again and then
they would do it again and it felt like
this vibration that was getting stronger
and stronger that was increasing this
kind of
um connection between um you know him
they're all giving his power to him and
and i started thinking this is this is
terrifying i'm i i
and i i felt like i might freak out and
i had this image then of bubbles that
were like air bubbles that were coming
to the surface but these were fear
bubbles
and if these fear bubbles broke the
surface then then i would panic and i
wouldn't be able to really deal with it
and the the one of the good things about
ketamine is that it doesn't interfere
with your respiration
that's why it's such a good anesthetic
drug so i had the thought breathe
breathe if you just breathe
maybe you'll be able to not panic so
much so i was able to breathe
and i didn't panic and then i got this
thought that there is no way
to get inside of hitler's head he's
getting so much out of it
you know that p the same way for
psychedelic therapy is that people have
to be willing
to face things that they're the ones
that are doing the healing
they're the ones that are doing the hard
work you try to create a safe and
supportive setting and you prepare them
but in the end the therapist is not the
the magician that's making everything
happen it's the person
healing themselves and they have to be
willing and so i realized
that he wasn't willing
there was no way that i i from the
outside you know he ended up committing
suicide
not having any kind of change even after
all of germany was
you know destroyed and so many people
were died
um so i realized though that the
long-term strategy
has to be all of those people that were
giving away
their power to hitler they get a lot
less out of it
so that that's why we need mass mental
health
that the strategy for for maps the
strategy that i'm trying to put
forward is how do we help all these
people who are giving away their power
to dictators or authoritarians or
you know um we see this a lot in america
too people that are giving away their
rationality and their power
we have to it's it's going to be easier
to help each one of them
work through their traumas and fears so
that they don't give away their power so
ironically rather than changing one
person
it's changing 50 million people or more
and so that's where maps of strategy has
been that the medicalization
is a tool for
a larger change in consciousness
that can only come from embedding this
kind of
new awareness in millions and billions
of people
which then need drug policy reform as
well as
drug development so most of the um
non-profit or for-profit psychedelic
companies
are about um drug development they're
about
training other therapists treating
people and doing research
and so the difference between maps and
them is that we are really
about mass mental health
and going beyond just working with
people that have a diagnosis to try to
spiritualize
humanity as a whole yeah that's that's
great you know it's funny so someone
a couple months ago mentioned that what
we do at healthy gamer
is something called aoe healing and
aoe means area of effect and so the
implication is it's actually i think it
aligns perfectly with mass
mental health so i mean a big part of
our mission and
what we do is is exactly what you
described it's sort of the idea that
you know we think that we can try to
understand ourselves better as
individuals
and the reason that we have these
interviews is so that one person can
share their experience
right and then that your experience goes
out and affects a ton of people
and then those people create changes in
their life without
which i think definitely does feed back
to you or at least to me
um we had a pretty traumatic uh suicide
in our community a couple of months ago
and you know i think it was hard on me
but i i think it was
really interesting to feel everyone's
energy and support and
and how at the end of the day it's like
we're all on the same team
and you know we have to support each
other and and i'm with you a hundred
percent about sort of
you know fixing each individual person
kind of one at a time
but that's how you create a mass you you
sort of i mean
it's a beautiful way to put it i think
it's it aligns perfectly with
what we've evolved into because that's
what healthy gamer has become it's been
become a community of somewhere between
30 and 250 000 people depending on which
metric you use
um and you know we really try to support
each other and we we try to work on
ourselves
and we work on ourselves together even
the way that you kind of described the
dmt process like we have a you know a
community like our discord server where
people come and sort of share their
individual take on things
um and then we kind of go around and
people will share their own take on a
particular subject
we had like this particular channel that
was devoted to ego so people come in and
they talk about okay
what's my ego telling me to do how do i
understand my ego how does my ego
interfere with things
and one of the things that i love about
hearing these communities and
in our groups is that it's really hard
to see
your problems in you because of
cognitive bias
it's way easier to see your problem in
someone else
and you can learn so much when somebody
else is talking about the same thing
that you can
that you struggle with and you're like
oh wow that's exactly what i do
and it's so much clearer when you're
kind of working together with a group of
people and when you kind of integrate
different people's perspectives
you can learn so much more so it's
amazing and and i want to say one thing
about ego too which is
a couple times i've used the word ego
death but i've mostly used ego
dissolution
but um i think ego death gives people
the very wrong impression
um and so we need our ego we just need
our ego to be in the proper
place so the metaphor is that um
well stan sanderoff has said that the
psychedelics are the study of the mind
what the microscope is the biology and
the telescope is to astronomy
and so you know at times the telescope
has produced
knowledge that was very dangerous and
this was for the
status quo so this was in the time of
copernicus galileo and all
and so what we thought at the time or
what people thought at the time
that the earth was the center of the
universe and that everything revolved
around that
and as it turned out that's not the case
um
that um we revolve the earth revolves
around the sun the sun is just the minor
part of this galaxy there's
billions of galaxies and i think the
same thing is true of the
the ego is that we think everything
revolves around us but that
actually there's the bigger self the
bigger world and so we need to put the
ego in its place
uh but we we need to pay attention to
our own ego we are
bounded by life and death we are
individuals to be egoists
to not pay attention to that is also not
paying attention to a
a key part of reality which is that we
are real
human beings and we have uh to take care
of ourselves and to take care of each
other so
what stan has also said is that the ego
becomes transparent to the transcendent
it's like cleaning the window but the
window doesn't go away the window
protects from
various things so i i just think that um
you could get very punitive in this idea
that i got to have no ego
yeah that's really important that that's
where i think you get that spiritual ego
that you see a lot in spiritual circles
the ego of having no ego
look at how egoless i am yeah
and and so i i'm with you and i think
sort of there there's so much that i
could kind of relate to what you said
in in sanskrit and sort of yogic
traditions um
you know and i'll just leave you with
two or three like i think the most
relevant things the first is that
you know the yogis also say ego is a
function of mind just like emotions or
intellect it's just about who's in
control
is the ego in control of you or are you
in control of the ego
the second thing that i i kind of it's
it's interesting so there's there are
four
um mahavakyas which are like great
phrases
and i think these are sort of the
essence of what a lot of yogis
understood
and one of them is aham brahmasmi which
means i am the universe
and and i think this is very poorly
understood because i think people sort
of assume that this is kind of like a
yoga calendar sort of concept it's like
i am like you know we're all connected
like it's not an intellectual or a
physical philosophical concept
aham brahmasmi is the experience that
you are hitler and hitler is you
and that that like is is terrifying
as that is that essentially there is
some kind of
underlying unity which carl jung talks
about
which you know people who have
psychedelic experiences talk about and
the yogis talk about
which is that the self and the other
that there is atman which is individual
soul and paramatman which is universal
soul
and that essentially like there's one
ocean and you can pull a drop
out and is the drop no longer the ocean
is it a separate thing what happens to
the drop as it goes back into the ocean
you know and and so like a humbra masmi
is like the main thing that
when i sort of do meditative practices
on the hum brahmasmi i think i have
experiences somewhat like what you
describe
um but it's interesting that there's so
much overlap between like eastern
mysticism and a lot of what you're
describing
yeah i i guess i'd like to go back just
for a second and then i do have to go
um which is to the the the sadness that
you said about the person that committed
suicide that was part of the community
and this isn't just about that person
but
but i think a lot of times what happens
is people lose the connection to the
whole
they feel so isolated and alone
that life is unbearable but but they
they have somehow
lost that touch with the the bigger
like uh you know cradled in the arms of
gravity or that kind of
love that permeates the universe or even
being part of something bigger
that that that i think that experience
can help
people um as an antidote to suicide
yeah that's been my experience that a
lot of people who feel suicidal
ultimately what they feel the most
profoundly is alone
yes isolated and um
it's a it's interesting as a mental
health provider to to see
what works for suicide and what doesn't
and
i mean i think that's a conversation
maybe for a different day but
rick i know you got to get going thank
you so much for coming
thank you for having me it's been a
wonderful discussion yeah thanks a lot i
i did not know that you wanted to be a
monk yeah
and so it's it's interesting um
thanks to wise monks and your wife that
uh talked you out of it
well take care rick and and best of luck
with everything and thank you so much
for all the work that you're doing and
all the wonderful work that maps is
doing
if people want to participate just learn
more maps.org
yeah perfect we'll we'll send that out
take care bye
you